In this video we are going to continue our discussion on building distributions and histogram from random
processes as opposed to discrete processes which you've been learning about so far.
So I'm going to start the video by talking about the distinction between a random process and a discrete
process.
And in Python you're going to get to see several different shapes of distributions of random numbers
and in the exercise which is probably going to be in the separate video.
You are going to learn how to change the shape of distribution so to normalize the shape of any distribution
into a galaxy and distribution.
Now so far in this section of the course most of the distributions that we've been working with with
some exceptions are those mathematical functions so X X squared and X cubed but most of the data sets
that we've been working with are discrete in the sense that there are individual elements unique elements
in the distribution like letters or some binary outcome or the result of rolling a die but not everything
in the world is discrete like this.
There is also for example links.
So let's imagine you wanted to create a distribution of the length of a bunch of blades of grass.
So that's what these are.
These are all individual blades of grass and maybe I don't know you're really bored on the weekends
and you don't have any friends so you go out and you just measure the lengths of blades of grass.
Actually I shouldn't be disparaging.
Perhaps it's a really interesting hobby to measure all these lengths anyway but how do you build a distribution
of these.
You can say something like you know let's count the number of blades of grass that were two centimeters
long 4 centimeters long five point three centimeters long.
But the thing is you're really never going to find a blade of grass that is exactly three centimeters.
So three point 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 centimeters is always gonna be some range.
So these are called discrete processes or discrete sets discrete numbers.
And these are random now they're called random not because they're totally random and unpredictable
but because the values in this particular example of the length of a blade of grass.
Those values can take any possible range or any value in the real numbers given of course some physical
constraints.
OK.
So to create a histogram of a dataset like this you just count the number of A's.
So there are two A's too BS and foresees for a random process like this.
But you have to do is set up a range of numbers so you would say how many blades of grass are between
1 and 2 centimeters not exactly one centimeter or exactly one point five centimeters but between 1 and
2 centimeters how many are between 2 and 3 centimeters.
And how many are between 3 and 4 and so on.
Now you've already been introduced to this idea in the first video of this course.
But here I'm talking about it in a little bit more detail and I'm going to explain a little bit more
how the Hist and histogram functions work in Python.
Now what's interesting about this approach of generating histogram from random processes is that you
have more control over the kinds of histogram results that you're going to get.
So for example you can say that I want exactly three bins that are evenly spaced between the numbers
1 and 4.
And that's what you get here or you can specify the exact ranges.
Now in this case the ranges are all exactly the same with.
So it's always you know one centimeter but you can also create these ranges to have different lengths.
So let's say this would be one to one point five and this bean would be one point five to three.
So I'm going to show you all these possibilities in Python.
I'm going to start by creating a normal distribution so you will recall that a normal distribution has
two parameters.
There is the shift parameter and let's set that to.
I don't know how about five and then we have a stressed parameter and maybe set that too and then I
will specify the N to be a thousand.
So it's gonna be 1000 data points that I'm going to generate.
So now let's generate those data points so none Pieta random that Rand and now if I just write the code
like this then this is going to generate not a normal distribution of random numbers with a mean of
zero and a variance of 1.
So to apply these two parameters you multiply by the stretch parameter and then add the shift parameter
and then let's just make sure that this is correct.
So I'm going to print out the mean of the distribution is that maybe I'll say the mean is % G.
And the standard deviation is percent G.
And then here we replace the first percent g with NUM pi.
I mean of all the points and then the standard deviation of all of the points OK I made a mistake here
and I wonder if you can also spot my mistake so my mistake is that I didn't provide any inputs into
the rand and function which means that it was only generating a single number here.
So I can show that you here I can say print P.A. us and it's only one number.
So of course the mean is that number and the standard deviation is zero.
There is no variability at all.
All right let's try this again.
There we go.
So the mean is 5 and the standard deviation is 1 point 9 7 which is pretty close to 2.
Okay.
So then what I'm going to do is generate a figure peyote with subplots.
Let's go for how about a one by two geometry and I'm gonna specify that the figure size should be six
by four inches.
And let's see.
So then in the first subplot I want to draw a plot of the numbers that's gonna be points and let's see.
I'm going to just to make this look I think it'll look a little bit nicer if we add a little bit of
transparency here.
Okay.
And then in the second subplot which is gonna be to the right I'm going to create a histogram of all
of the points.
So let's see what this looks like so that looks pretty good.
I think I might change this from four to three that I think that looks a little bit better.
Okay.
So what I would like to do now is make this histogram be a little bit finer.
So I want more resolution in this histogram.
So I'm going to provide a second input into the Hist function and that's going to be let's say one hundred.
So now we get 100 bins between the smallest value and the largest value and you can see that the center
of this distribution is indeed around 5.
Now what would happen if you make this larger.
Let's try for like 500.
So it's starting to look a little bit less nice.
Let's go for a thousand.
So now when there's 1000 bins that actually corresponds to the same as the total number of points.
Now it's not necessarily going to correspond to one bin per point because there could be some points
that are really really close together.
So they still end up in the same bin but you can see that the largest bin which is right around the
center of the Gaussian distribution has only seven numbers in there.
So this is actually too much.
Now there are all sorts of guidelines to know what is an appropriate number of bins for a particular
distribution.
However those are all basically guidelines.
There is no real hard and fast rules to know with certainty what is the right or the correct number
of bins for a distribution.
So usually you just play around guess a few different numbers and see what looks good.
So I am pretty happy with 50 here.
The next distribution I want to show is a uniform distribution.
Now of course you remember what a uniform distribution is.
It is a distribution that is given first of all by the function Rand.
So not Rand N but just Rand and the distribution like this.
So if we just write the code like this that's going to give us uniformly distributed numbers between
0 and 1.
And so if you want to stretch and shift this distribution the formula is a little bit more complicated.
So we'd say times stretch and actually it's already interesting to look at this so far.
So now we've done a stretch this distribution to go from zero to two and now what I want to do is shift
it so that the mean is around five.
Now you can try doing something like what we did with the normal distribution.
So just adding the shift parameter but that is not going to work.
That's not going to be accurate which you can see here.
And the reason why this isn't accurate is because this distribution on its own doesn't already have
a mean value of zero.
So by shifting it by adding this well we're actually adding is whatever is the mean of this distribution
not just this distribution and the mean of this stretched distribution is basically going to be half
of this.
So therefore we say plus shift minus one half or I'll say point five times the stretch parameter loops
that should be spelled like this okay and then another difference is that for a uniform distribution
the standard deviation is actually less relevant than the range.
And that's because the size of the variance is the same for the entire distribution.
The variance is the same everywhere.
So what we actually care about here is the range.
So therefore instead of computing the standard deviation I'm going to report the range.
So I will say the range is.
And then what we need to do here is say instead of standard deviation the range is just the largest
value minus the smallest value.
So none paid out Max minus none piled up.
Men of P.A. yes.
And there you go.
Now we get the requested parameters I mentioned in the slides a few moments ago that you can specify
a histogram.
Not only according to the number of bins but also according to the exact boundaries of the bins.
And again this is something that I introduced you to in the very beginning of this section but now I'm
going to talk about it in more detail.
So I'm gonna say bins equals and now instead of just specifying a number like 50 I'm going to specify
the exact boundaries of the bins.
So let's say 4 and 4.5 and 5 5.5 and 6.
And now keep in mind that this last number here is actually exclusive.
So that means that the last bin is gonna go up to 6.
So therefore if you also have numbers in this distribution that are higher than six you'll want to have
another boundary that is larger.
Now in this particular case we don't need that.
There's no numbers higher than six.
So this bin ends up being empty.
Okay.
Now I have just illustrated to you creating these bins to be all equally sized.
So the spacing between each bin boundary is exactly the same but that is just an option.
So for example you can say four four point one and then maybe let's go up to five point four and then
5.5 and six loops one too many comments in there.
Okay.
So then we get this kind of funny looking distribution and I think to be able to see this a little bit
better to visualize this better what I'm going to do is set the edge color to be black and that's going
to draw boundaries around each of these boxes so you can see this is still a histogram but the sizes
of the bins are different.
Now I would like to point out something and I hope that I'm very very clear about this.
This is generally not a good idea.
So having histogram bins of different widths is usually not a good idea.
And the reason is that it can skew the appearance of the results.
So you might look at this histogram and say oh most of the values are between four point one and five
point four and there's fewer values above 5.5.
Now that is kind of correct because that's how the histogram boundaries are created.
However that is not really an appropriate interpretation or I should say it's very very easy to misinterpret
the data.
The characteristics of the data based on this histogram.
And that's because this isn't really the case in the in the data the data are evenly distributed between
4 and 6.
But this histogram while not being technically incorrect this is actually correct but it is misleading
and a little bit confusing.
Okay.
So I wanted to show you that this is possible but in general I don't recommend doing something like
this much better just to have all of the bin boundaries have equal width.
There is one more distribution that I want to introduce you to and it's a pretty interesting distribution
and I'm going to put that in a new cell because I'm gonna be changing quite a few things.
So let's see.
So first of all the points are going to be drawn from a distribution that's called a plus on plus on
distribution.
And now we don't need any of these parameters the price on distribution has one parameter which is lambda.
It's typically given as the Greek letter lambda I'm gonna specify this to be three point four.
And so in the plus on function we input the lambda parameter and then the number of numbers that we
want to extract and let's see I think all of this can stay the same.
So let's see what this looks like.
So here you see a plus on distributed random numbers.
You can see they're all integers which is pretty interesting.
And here you see the distribution which almost looks a little bit Gaussian but it's shifted off to the
right.
So what is this lambda parameter here.
So the lambda parameter actually encodes both the mean and the variance so to show you that I'm going
to say mean is percent G and variance is percent G.
So now replace the present GS with NUM piled up mean P.A. us and num PI that mean some Pi the variance
p and t us.
All right.
So I specified lambda to be three point four and what we got was a bunch of integers where the mean
is three point four and the variance is also okay not exactly three point four.
But if we keep running this over and over it's going to converge to three point four in theory that
is a pretty remarkable feature of the plus on distribution that the mean is equal to the variance.
So for example if you have small numbers then you're only going to have a few different integers and
you can make this larger make the lambda parameter larger.
And that changes the shape of the distribution.
OK.
So let's set this back to about 4.
And now the thing is that with 50 bins for this distribution we end up with a lot of beans in here that
are zero.
That's why this bar plot has such thin bars.
In fact there are you know there's there might be one or two spaces in between each of these bars where
there are no values.
So there is no value in between one and two.
So therefore what I'm going to do is show you another trick for specifying the bins of the histogram.
And this is a useful trick for cases like what we have here where you have integer numbers.
So num pi dot a range and we are going to range from zero to the maximum of the points.
So that specifies the bean edges.
And now this looks a lot nicer except one more thing that we need to change here which is that I said
earlier that this top value for the bins is going to be exclusive.
So in fact what we really want to make this a complete histogram is the maximum value plus one so that
we make sure we get the maximum value of this distribution inside this histogram.
OK.
And then let's try changing this to white because I think that also looks pretty nice I hope you found
this video instructive.
I told you a lot more about using the histogram function and the extra parameters that you can apply
for the Hist function actually but the number pi histogram function works the same way.
The next video is going to contain the exercise from this video is going to be super enlightening because
you will learn how to transform any distribution from a non normal distribution.
It doesn't matter what the shape is into a Gaussian distribution.
So I will see you soon.